OBJECTIVE

1.  The caravan of Ishmaelites that bought Joseph traded in

A. balm, gum and myrrh
B. oil, balm and gum
C. myrrh, maize and wheat
D. gum, frankincense and oil


2. Before Joseph came to pharaoh after his release from prison, Joseph

A. ate some food
B. prayed fervently
C. shaved and ate
D. shaved and changed his clothes


3.  How long was the famine before Joseph reconciled with his brother?

A. 1 year
B. 2 years
C. 4 years
D. 5 years


4.  Which of the following was not an excuse Moses gave when he was called to deliver the Israelites?

A. The Israelites would not believe him
B. He was slow to speak
C. he was a murderer
D. He doubted his own ability


5. Regardless of the Egyptians' suffering, Pharaoh refused to let the Israelites go because 

A. the Israelites gave them cheap labour
B. Pharaoh wanted to challenge god
C. god allowed the Israelites to suffer
D. the Israelites refused to pray to God


6. As soon as the Egyptians caught up with the Israelites at the Red sea, the pillar of clouds 

A. vanished from the sight of the Israelites
B. stood on the left side of the Israelites
C. stood between the Israelites and the Egyptians
D. moved ahead of the Israelites


7. One of the spies Moses sent to the land of Canaan from the tribe of Reuben was

A. Shaphat
B. Shammua
C. Igal
D. Gaddiel


8. Why does the Lord bring us into this land, to fall by the sword? our wives and our little ones will become a prey;... On which occasion was this statement made? When the

A. Israelites got to the Red sea
B. Israelites had no water to drink
C. Spies gave adverse report
D. Egyptians caught up with the Israelites


9. Barak who was asked by Deborah to organise troops to fight the Canaanites was the son of 

A. Joab
B. Jehoahaz
C. Abijah
D. Abinoam


10. You shall invest him with some of your authority, that all the congregation of the people of Israel may obey. This instruction was given in connection with the 

A. appointment of Joshua to succeed Moses
B. appointment of Eleazar as priest to succeed Aaron
C. appointment of Aaron as Moses' spokesman
D. election of Eleazar by Aaron to succeed him


11. Why do you do such thing? For I hear of your evil dealings from all the people. No, my sons; it is no good report that I hear... The sons being addressed were children of

A. Joshua
B. Samuel
C. Elkannah
D. Eli


12. At the time Samuel was ministering to the Lord under Eli 

A. there were many prophets in Israel
B. the word of God was rare with no frequent vision
C. idolatry was common in Israel
D. visions were used by God to give directions


13. Through meditation, the book of the law became Joshua's source of 

A. Justice and freedom
B. peace and harmony
C. prosperity and success
D. courage and strength

14. Through meditation, the book of the law became Joshua's source of 

A. Justice and freedom
B. peace and harmony
C. prosperity and success
D. courage and strength


15. Israel lost 30,000 soldiers in a battle with the Philistines because

A. the Ark of God was captured
B. the soldiers disobeyed God
C. of the sins of Eli's sons
D. of the absence of Eli at the battle field


16. The reaction of Saul's armour-bearer after the death of his master amounted to

A. faithlessness
B. bravery
C. disappointment
D. loyalty


17. When David and Abishai went to the camp of Saul ay Ziph, Saul and his men were fast asleep because 

A. they were tired due to hard day's work
B. they wanted David to kill Saul and his men
C. they were afraid of their enermies so they slept in cave
D. the Lord allowed a deep sleep to fall on them


18. The child David had with Uri'ah's wife fell sick and died within 

A. seven days
B. eight days
C. nine days
D. ten days


19. After Solomon had the dream at Gibeon, the Lord promised to lengthen his days on condition that he would

A. sacrifice to him
B. pray daily
C. offer burnt offering
D. walk in his ways


20. The king of Tyre who supported King Solomon with timber for the building of the temple was

A. Hiram
B. Neco
C. Dairus
D. Cyrus


21. God decided not to divide the kingdom of Israel during  the reign of Solomon because 

A. Solomon built the temple for God
B. Solomon was a very wise king
C. of God's love for David
D. of Isreal's repentance


22. The kingdom of Israel  was divided during the reign of Rehoboam because, he 

A. followed his father's tyranny
B. led Israel to war
C. challenged Jeroboam
D. worshiped other gods


23. Yes what they are building if a fox goes up on it he will break down their stone wall! This remark made by Tobiah was intended to 

A. alert and encourage Nehemiah
B. stop and disgrace the Jews
C. embarrass Nehemiah
D. ridicule the Jews


24. Which of the following people led the rebuilding of the temple in Jerusalem after the Jews returned from exile?

A. Sheatiel and Zechariah
B. Jeshua and Haggai
C. Haggai and Zechariah
D. Zerubbabel and Jeshua


25. Two kings of Persia who passed decrees to bring about the rebuilding of the temple in Jerusalem were

A. Cyrus and Belshazzar
B. Darius and Cyrus
C. Haggai and Belshazzar
D. Artaxerxes and Nebuchadnezzar


26. The Jew who came from exile to Jerusalem to study the law of the Lord and teach others was 

A. Sheshbazzar
B. Haggai
C. Zechariah
D. Ezra


27. According to Luke's gospel, when the Devil had ended the temptation of Jesus, the Devil departed

A. and Jesus was baptized in the Jordan
B. to work out a better strategy
C. feeling defeated and embarrased
D. and Angels came to minister to Jesus because he had accomplished His mission


28. Jesus stood in a boat belonging to Peter by lake of Gennesaret to 

A. heal the sick
B. cure te leper
C. raise the dead
D. teach the crowd


29. The gospel which states that the spirit immediately drove Jesus into the wilderness after His baptism to be tempted is 

A. mark's gospel
B. Luke's gospel
C. John's gospel
D. Mathew's gospel


30. According to mark's gospel, Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist after He came from

A. Capernaum
B. Judea
C. Nazarath
D. Bethlehem


31. What was Jesus' response to the would-be disciple who wanted to bury his father?

A. Foxes have wholes and birds have nests
B. He could go and give his father a befitting burial
C. Follow me and let your siblings bury him
D. Follow me and leave the dead to bury their own dead


32. What was Jesus' response to the would-be disciple who wanted to bury his father?

A. Foxes have wholes and birds have nests
B. He could go and give his father a befitting burial
C. Follow me and let your siblings bury him
D. Follow me and leave the dead to bury their own dead


33. My soul is very sorrowful, even to death, remain here and watch with me... Jesus made this statement to

A. Peter, James and John
B. the seventy disciples
C. the twelve apostles
D. Andrew, James and Steven


34. According to Jesus, a major condition for discipleship is to 

A. be baptized with immersion
B. overcome all temptations
C. respect parents and elderly people
D. renounce all that one has


35. Peter wept after he had denied Jesus because he was 

A. sad since Jesus was going to be killed
B. going to miss Jesus
C. recognized as Jesus' disciple
D. feeling ashamed for the betrayal


36. Have you come out as a robber with swords and clubs to capture me?

A. in the Gethsemane
B. during His trial
C. during His crucifixion
D. at Golgotha on the cross


37. Jesus' enermies accused him of perverting the nation, forbidding the payment of tribute to Caesar and claiming to be a king before

A. Herod
B. High priest
C. Pilate
D. the Sanhedrin


38. What prompted Pilate to send Jesus to Herod for trial? Pilate

A. realized that Jesus was innocent
B. knew Jesus came from Herod's jurisdiction
C. wanted to avoid being blamed for Jesus' death
D. saw that Herod was a better judge


39. The woman who visited the tomb of Jesus on the first day according to Luke's gospel were

A. Mary Magdalene, Joana and Mary the mother of Jesus
B. Joana, Salome and Mary the mother of Jesus
C. Salome, Eunice and Mary Magdalene
D. Mary the mother of James, Salome and Joana


40. What purnishment was given to the unmerciful servant by the king in Jesus' teaching on forgiveness?

A. He was demoted
B. He was killed
C. His family was sold
D. He was imprisoned


41. Judas Iscariot lost his position as a disciple of Jesus because he

A. was expelled
B. fell sick and died
C. committed suicide
D. denounced the faith


42. When Peter and John were set free by the Sanhedrin, they were 

A. asked not to speak about Jesus again
B. asked to join the other apostles
C. given thirty-nine lashes each
D. sent to Pilate for trial


43. When Peter and John were set free by the Sanhedrin, they were 

A. asked not to speak about Jesus again
B. asked to join the other apostles
C. given thirty-nine lashes each
D. sent to Pilate for trial


44. Why did you go to uncircumcised men and eat with them? The uncircumcised men in the context were

A. Sanhedrin and the Pharisees
B. Aeneas and his family
C. Saul and his friends
D. Cornelius and his family


45. But be doers of the word not hearers only. This text according to James implies that Christians should

A. reflect their faith in their lifestyles
B. live above reproach and wickedness
C. love one another as Christ did
D. set heaven as their goal to achieve


46. Discrimination in the daily distribution of relief items in the early church came up when the

A. Hallenists complained about neglect of their widows
B. Hebrews complained about neglect of their widows
C. apostles refuse to serve tables
D. apostles decided to appoint deacons


47. What happened to Saul while in the house of Judas in the street called straight? 

A. An attempt to be lynched for betraying Judaism
B. An attempt to be killed for opposing the gospel
C. His escape to Jerusalem through Barnabas
D. The regaining of his sight through Ananias


48. Herod Agrippa's killing of James and subsequent arrest of Peter was an attempt to 

A. demonstrate his hatred for Christians
B. fulfil the order of the Roman Emperor
C. win the conference of the Jews
D. show how powerful he was


49. James states that the sick should be interceded for by the Elders but those who are suffering should 

A. fast daily
B. go to church
C. read the Bible
D. pray themselves


50. In his teaching on faith and works, James says that people should be quick to hear, slow to speak and

A. be fervent in prayer
B. be involved in fasting
C. slow to fight
D. slow to anger




Correct Answer - Objective
1. A 2. D 3. B 4. C 5. A 6. C 7. B 8. C 9. D 10. A 11. D 12. B 13. C 14. C 15. A 16. D 17. D 18. A 19. D 20. A

21. C 22. A 23. D 24. D 25. D 26. D 27. C 28. D 29. A 30. C 31. D 32. D 33. A 34. D 35. D 36. A 37. C 38. B 39. A 40. D

41. C 42. A 43. A 44. D 45. A 46. A 47. D 48. C 49. D 50. D



THEORY

1a. What are the contribution of Cyrus to the return to the Jews?

1b. Measures a nation can take to prevent God's Wrath.


2a. List some of Joseph's first encounters with Pharaoh.

2b. State some lessons leaders can learn from Joseph.


3a. What are the roles played by Jezebel in the death of Naboth?

3b. Reasons why people are greedy.


4a. What are the promises God made to Joshua when He was appointed to lead the Israelites?

4b. What are the benefits of fulfilling one's promises?


5a. What are the events that took place after Herod Agrippai killed James?

5b. What are the factors that motivate Christians to pray?


6a. How was the problem of discrimination solved in the early church?

6b. Effects of Discrimination in the Society.


7a. How Saul escaped the plot and attempt on his life in Damascus.

7b. Reasons people wish evil for others.



Correct Answer - Theory

1a.

i. In 539B.C, Cyrus the King of Persia defeated Babylon and took control of the Babylonian empire.

ii. In the first year of Cyrus' reign, God inspired Jerusalem to pass decree to return the Jews to Jerusalem

iii. This was to fulfil the prophecy of Jerusalem

iv.  In a decree, Cyrus acknowledged the fact that God had made him ruler of the whole world and that he should see to the rebuilding of the temple

v. he further declared that the God of Israel is the God who is in Jerusalem

vi. In view of that, Cýrus asked the exiles to go and rebuild the temple on his behalf etc.


1b. 

i. Avoid sinful acts/living righteous life

ii. Avoid worshipping other gods

iii. Being obedient to God

iv. Avoidance of sexual immorality

v. Confessing and repenting from sin

vi. Ensuring fairness and justice for all etc.


2a. (Gen. 41:1-45)


i. Joseph was imprisoned by Potiphar after he was falsely accused of rape by Potiphar's wife

ii. Pharaoh had a dream that he stood by the River Nile and saw seven fat cows and seven lean cows all coming from the river

iii. The fat cows were swallowed by the thin, lean cows

iv. He also saw seven thin ears of corn come up on another stalk

v. And the seven thin ears of corn ate up the seven good ones

vi. When Pharaoh woke up, he summoned his magicians and wise men to interpret the dreams but they could not.

vii. At this juncture, Pharaoh's chief butlet remembered how Joseph had interpreted his dreams in prison two years ago

- And upon the recomendation of the butler, Pharaoh sent for Joseph from prison to interpret his dreams.

- Pharaoh narrated the dreams to him and Joseph said it was only God who gives favourable interpretation of dreams.

- Joseph then told Pharaoh that the two dreams were the same and that the seven fat cows and seven good ears of corn stood for seven years of abundant harvest in Egypt

- Joseph further said that the seven lean cows and seven thin ears of corn represent seven years of famine in Egypt etc.

 

2b.

- He was a visionary

- He was humble

- He was patient

- He had administrative equalities

- He had a positive attitude towards misfortune

- using his talent for the benefit of other etc.


3a. (1 Kings 21:1-29)

- Naboth the Jezreelite owned a vineyard near the palace of King Ahab

- Ahab requested for Naboth's vineyard to be used as a vegetable garden since it was near the palace

- King Ahab was ready to give Naboth another land or pay for its value

- But Naboth refused to give out the land since it was inherited from his father

- Ahab went home very sad and angry and went to bed without food

- Jezebel, the wife came home and enquired from Ahab why he was in a sad mood and would not eat.

- Ahab told her it was because of Naboth's refusal to give him his vineyard

- Jezebel asked Ahab if he was not truly the king of Israel, and she promised to collect the vineyard for him. etc


3b.

- Desire for material things

- Selfishness

- Extravagance

- Envy/jealousy

- Unhealthy competition

- Desire for popularity etc.


4a. (Joshua 1:1-8)

- When Moses was getting old, he prayed to God to appoint a successor to take over from him

- God then instructed Moses to take Joshua, a man full of the spirit

- Moses brought Joshua before the Priest and the whole of Israel to be commissioned

- God promised that at Joshua's word, Israel shall go out and come in victorious

- After the death of Moses, Joshua took up the leadership of Israel etc.

 
4b.

- It makes one trustworthy

- It makes one gain respect

- It promotes cordial relationships

- Encourages proper planning

- It prevents conflicts

- It makes it possible for one to be given responsibilities etc.


5a. (Acts i2:1-19)

- In his determination to persecute the Church, Herod laid violent hands on some members.

- he killed James, the brother of John

- This act pleased the Jews

- Herod, who wanted to please the Jews more, arrested Peter and intended to kill him after the Passover

- Whilst in prison, Peter was chained and being guarded by four groups of soldiers so that he would not escape.

- The brethren met in the house of Mary the mother of the disciple called John mark to pray for Peter's safety etc.

 

5b. 

Several factors motivate Christians to pray, including:

-  1. Communication with God: Prayer is a means for Christians to communicate with God, express their thoughts, feelings and desires, and seek guidance.

-  2. Dependence on God: Recognising their need for divine help in daily life, challenges and decisions, Christians are motivated to pray for God’s intervention.

-  3. Worship and Praise: Christians pray to worship and praise God for His greatness and faithfulness.

-  4. Seeking Forgiveness: Prayer is a channel for repentance, where Christians ask for forgiveness for their sins and receive God's grace.

-  5. Intercession for Others: Christians are often motivated by a desire to intercede for others, praying for their well-being, salvation or healing.

-  6. Thanksgiving: Gratitude for blessings and answered prayers drives Christians to continue in prayer.

-  7. Obedience to God’s Word: Many Christians are motivated to pray because it is commanded in the Bible (e.g., 1 Thessalonians 5:17, "pray without ceasing").

-  8. Strength in Times of Trouble: During trials and tribulations, prayer offers comfort, peace, and the strength to endure difficult circumstances.


6a. (Acts 6:2-6)

- A complaint was made to the Apostles about discrimination among believers with regards to the welfare of the widows

- This problem came up due to the increase in the number of the early church

- The Apostles informed the brethren that they could not forgo their main task of preaching the word of God to serve tables

- What the Apostles said pleased the whole multitude

- They, therefore, said that competent men should be appointed to be in charge of the daily distribution

- And they would have time to engage in evangelism

- Seven men of good character were to be appointed etc.

 
6b. 

- It reduces people's trust and confidence in leadership

- It creates a feeling of exclusion or rejection in people

- Employees who are discriminated against may feel unappreciated by their employers

- It leads to social vices

- It stifles initiative etc.


7a. (Acts 9:21-31)

- After his conversion, Saul remained with the disciples at Damascus for several days

- He proclaimed in the synagogue at Damascus that Jesus was the son of God

- People who heard him were amazed since they knew him as a serious persecutor of the believers

- The people remarked, "is not this man who wreaked havoc in Jerusalem on those who called on Jesus' name?"

- A further remark was made that Saul had come to Damascus to arrest the believers and send them to the chief priest etc.

 
7b. 

- To win the favour of others.

- Due to jealousy.

- Religious or political differences.

- Ethnic conflicts or differences.

- Revenge or retaliation.

- Unhealthy competition.

- Inferiority or Superiority complex etc.