OBJECTIVE

1. According to the second creation story, which of the following were formed out of the ground?

A. Sun, moon and stars
B. Firmaments and light
C. Beast of the field and birds
D. Fishes and all sea monsters


2. Which of the following is the reason for which God decided to make a helper fit for man in the garden of Eden? For

A. communication
B. companionship
C. fellowship
D. procreation


3. The supremacy of God during creation was manifested by His

A. consent that a thing be done
B. command of let there be
C. creation of human kind
D. control over the heavens


4. Apart from Joseph who was already in Egypt, the offspring of Jacob that migrated from Canaan to Egypt numbered

A. Sixty
B. Seventy
C. Eighty
D. Ninety


5. The name Manasseh which Joseph gave to his first son means

A. a beloved son of Joseph's wife
B. God had made Joseph forget his hardship
C. God had delivered Joseph from death
D. God had forgotten Joseph and his family


6. And the Lord said to Moses see, I make you as God to Pharaoh; and Aaron your bother - shall. which of the following roles was Aaron assigned?

A. prophet
B. priest
C. seer
D. servant


7. The presence of God among the Israelites is demonstrated by the symbol of 

A. fire and cloud
B. smoke and water
C. wind and dust
D. clouds and winds


8. Joshua's success in the promised land was attributed to the fact that he was

A. carefree about keeping the laws of God
B. strong and of good courage
C. anointed by Moses personally
D. able to take responsibilities


9. During the mission of the twelve spies, which of the following tribes did Joshua represent?

A. Ephraim
B. Judah
C. Reuben
D. Levi


10. Who among the following Kings did God sell the people of Israel to and were oppressed for twenty years?

A. Ahab
B. Jabin
C. Nebuchadnezzar
D. Asa


11. Sisera, the commander was killed by Jael whose husband as a 

A. Philistine
B. Israelite
C. Kenite
D. Jebusite


12. Which of the following was the major sin attributed to Hophni and Phinehas? They

A. treated the offering of the Lord with contempt
B. took bribes and has no regard for justice
C. engaged in idolatry and adultery
D. deposed their father from priesthood


13. Samuel was said to have failed in matters of parental responsibility because he

A. made his children to succeed him
B. made his children judges over Israel
C. did not bring up his children in his way
D. could not maintain unity in his family


14. Though you are little in your own eyes, are you not the head of the tribes of Israeli On which occasion was this statement made?

A. During the sacrifice at Michmash
B. When the sons of Samuel disobeyed God
C. When the evil spirit tormented Saul
D. During the war between Israel and Amalek


15. One important lesson that could be learnt from David when he spared the life of Saul is

A. that we must not insult kings despite their wickedness
B. to avoid retaliation for wrong done against us
C. to pray for all who hate you
D. that no king should be killed by his subject.


16. Which of the following names was given to Solomon by the prophet Nathan when he was born?

A. Ammon
B. Absalom
C. Jedediah
D. Tain or


17. And God said "Ask what I shall give you" To whom and where was this request made?

A. David at Hebron
B. Solomon at Hebron
C. David at Gibeon
D. Solomon at Gibeon


18. A major mistake attributed to Rehoboam was his decision to

A. dare Jeroboam to divide the kingdom
B. lead Israel to war without God's approval
C. worship other gods and marry foreign wives
D. follow the negative footsteps of Solomon.


19. The reason for which the building of the temple came into fulfillment during the time of Solomon was that

A. David was guilty for shedding blood
B. there was relative peace during his reign
C. his father had arranged for building materials
D. he offered enough sacrifices to God


20. When Jezebel decided to cut off the prophets of the Lord, who among the following took a hundred prophets and hid them in a cave?

A. Elijah
B. Elisha
C. Nathan
D. Obadiah


21. Elijah ran from Mount.Carmel to the city of Jezreel because he was

A. chased by the Baal prophets
B. overjoyed-by his journey
C. pursued by Ahab the king
D. possessed by the spirit of God


22. Proclaim a fast and set Naboth on high among the people. Which of the following was Naboth charged with after the proclamation? He was charged with

A. claiming to be the messiah and king
B. cursing God and the King
C. instigating riot among the people
D. refusing to release the family land to the king


23. Which of the following was the reason for which God promised to punish the house of Ahab and not Ahab himself? Ahab

A. humbled himself
B. acted under pressure
C. was a righteous man
D. acted wisely


24. I have found the book of the law in the house of the Lord. The discovery of the law book____________

A. revealed the sins of Manasseh
B. gave Josiah's reform direction
C. railed for the revival of the passover
D. revealed God's righteousness and purity


25. Huldah, the prophetess, pronounced evil upon Judah because the people

A. had burned incense to other gods
B. were marrying foreign women
C. were disobedient to the king
D. had failed to keep the sabbath.


26. But the army of the Chaldeans pursued the king and overtook him in the plains of Jericho. This text alludes to the incident where

A. the Babylonians arrested Zedekiah
B. the Babylonians made Zedekiah king
C. Nebuchadnezzar's army arrested Jehoiachin
D. Nebuchadnezzar's army chased Jehoiachin.


27. Which of the following ways did Nehemiah demonstrate concern for his nation? He

A. revived the worship of Yahweh
B. rebuilt the temple of Jericho
C. reconstructed the walls of Jerusalem
D. led the exiles back home.


28. Then these men came by agreement and found Daniel making petition and supplication before his God. The people the reminded the king about the following except

A. punishment for defaulters
B. power of the treaty
C. ban on worship
D. freedom of worship


29. One immoral act that took place in Israel which was condemned by Amos was that

A. priests slept with women in the temple
B. Nazarites drank wine and slept in the temple
C. the rich men took the wives of the poor
D. a man and his father went into the same woman


30. To win Israel back to Himself, God promised turning the valley of Achor into a place of

A. peace
B. hope
C. mercy
D. joy


31. One significant difference between Matthew's and Mark's account of Jesus' baptism is that

A. Matthew alone said that John felt inferior to baptize Jesus
B. Matthew alone said a voice came from heaven
C. Mark alone made mention of Galilee during the baptism
D. only Matthew reported that the spirit alighted on Jesus.


32. Which of the following was the sequence of Jesus' temptation according to Matthew?

A. Temple - wilderness -mountain
B. Wilderness - temple - mountain
C. Mountain -temple -wilderness
D. Wilderness - mountain - temple


33. I desire mercy, and not sacrifice! for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners. Jesus made this remark when

A. He called the first disciples by the sea
B. the Sadducees accused Him of eating with sinners
C. the Pharisees accused Him of eating with sinners
D. He healed the woman with the issue of blood


34. Jesus' call of the first four disciples to be "fishers of men" implied that they were to

A. propagate the teachings of Jesus
B. convert the Jews into Christians
C. win proselytes to Jesus
D. be trained to become Rabbis.


35. I do not say to you seven times, but seventy times seven. Bv this Jesus meant By this forgiveness

A. must be done only seven
B. takes place where there is a plea
C. is exercised when offence is repeated severally
D. does not need to have any limitation


36. One of the major things Christians should do to merit God's forgiveness according to Jesus is

A. praying without ceasing
B. fellowshipping together
C. offering sacrifices to God
D. forgiving people who offend them


37. Which of the following is not a humiliation Jesus suffered during his trial?

A. They spat on him
B. His face was covered
C. They put a crown on his head
D. The guards received him with blows


38. My soul is very sorrowful, even to death; remain here and watch with me. Where was this remark made by Jesus?

A. In the garden of Gethsemane
B. When he was in the palace of Caiaphas
C. On the way to Golgotha
D. When he was sent to Herod.


39. Jesus' offer of paradise to the repentant thief on the cross teaches that

A. God's word must be fulfilled
B. repentance is never too late
C. Jesus was crucified to save sinners
D. people are punished not for their sins


40. O foolish men, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken! Which people were being referred to as foolish? The

A. two men travelling to Emmaus
B. seventy disciples Jesus sent out
C. twelve apostles of Jesus
D. women who went to the tomb of Jesus.


41. Which of the following qualified Matthias as an apostle to replace Judas Iscariot? He

A. had accompanied the disciples from the time of the baptism of Jesus
B. took active part in evangelism from house to house
C. was among the early disciples who prayed fervently
D. was among the one hundred and twenty disciples who had the Holy Spirit


42. The replacement of Judas Iscariot was necessary because the

A. death of Judas Iscariot was premature
B. twelve disciples represented the twelve tribes of Israel
C. prophesies of the scripture needed to be fulfilled
D. status quo of the twelve must be maintained


43. Why did you go to uncircumcised men and eat with them! The uncircumcised men were the

A. Gentiles of Caesarea
B. Gentiles of Joppa
C. household of Cornelius
D. household of Simon


44. From his experience on the road to Damascus Saul learnt all the following except

A. Persecuting the church meant persecuting the Lord
B. His confidence in Judaism was misplaced
C. He was specially chosen to preach to the Gentile
D. He could successfully promote his own will


45. And there is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved. This needs statement was made by

A. Jesus when he was going to heaven
B. The seven deacons during the appointment
C. Peter before the Sanhedrin
D. The apostles on the day of Pentecost


46. Which of the following biblical characters was mentioned to have justified his/her faith by works?

A. Ahab
B. Jael
C. Rehab
D. Barnabas


47. Is any among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church and let them pray over him. By this statement, James meant that

A. we should not pray for ourselves when we are sick
B. the prayer of the faithful will save the sick
C. elders of the church can perform wonders
D. prayer without the elders may not be effective


48. Peter's encouragement to Christians to put away all forms of malice implies that

A. it is a divine command to forgive
B. Christians should emulate Christ
C. forgiveness heals the heart
D. grievances breeds disunity


49. The call on Christians to live as free men, yet without using such freedom as a pretext for perpetuating evil was intended for them to

A. do what is right always
B. resist the temptations of the devil
C. fight for their right and freedom
D. endure suffering and persecutions.


50. Peter states that God opposes the proud but to the humble, He

A. provides all their needs
B. gives them protection
C. grants them success
D. grants them grace



Correct Answer - Objective
1. C 2. B 3. B 4. B 5. B 6. A 7. A 8. B 9. A 10. B 11. C 12. A 13. C 14. D 15. B 16. C 17. D 18. D 19. A 20. D

21. C 22. B 23. A 24. B 25. A 26. A 27. C 28. D 29. D 30. B 31.A 32. B 33. C 34. A 35. D 36. D 37. B 38. A 39. B 40. A

41. A 42. C 43. C 44. D 45. C 46. C 47. B 48. A 49. A 50. D




THEORY

1. 
(a) Give an account of the story of the crossing of the Red Sea by the Israelites under the leadership of Moses.

(b) Mention three anc the lessons that can be learnt about the nature of the God from the above incident.


2.
(a) Relate the events that led to the Providing pronouncement of punishment on the household of Eli.

(b) State three ways by in their which parents can make their children responsible.


3.
(a) I have done wrong; return, my son David, for I will no more do you harm ... Recount the events that led to this apology.

(b) What two qualities can we derive from David's attitude?


4.
(a) Recount Josiah's response to the discovery of the Book of the Law in the temple.

(b) Identify three ways in which the religious situation today is similar to Josiah's days.


5.
(a) My soul is very sorrowful, even to death; remain here, and watch with me. Give an account of what happened to Jesus after he made this statement.

(b) State two ways by which one can assist people going through challenges.


6.
(a) You wicked servant; I forgave you all that debt because you besought me … Outline the circumstances that led to the above statement.

(b) State three reasons for which people find it difficult to forgive.


7.
(a) Give an account of how the prophecy of Joel was fulfilled on the day of Pentecost.

(b) In what two ways was the above incident significant?


8.
(a) Recount the teachings of James in which he remarked that love your neighbour as yourself.

(b) Identify three negative effects of discrimination among Christians.


9.
(a) Outline Peter's recommendations that believers should interact with unbelievers in the society.

(b) State three ways by which Christians can live above reproach in the society.



Correct Answer - Theory

1(a). (Exodus 13:17-22, 14:1-31)

(i) Pharaoh allowed the Israelites to leave Egypt into the wilderness to worship God after years resistance,

(ii) He thought they would be on a three-day journey as they had earlier requested

(iii) Pharaoh never knew that they intended to leave forever,

(iv) When Pharaoh was informed that the Israelites had fled, he regretted allowing them to go.

(v) Pharaoh the and his men took their chariots and chased ee the Israelites.

(vi) God hardened Pharaoh's of heart and he pursued the Israelites till he caught up with them at the Red Sea.

(vii) The Israelites feared greatly when the Egyptians were just behind them and Red Sea was before them.

(viii) They complained to Moses that he had brought them to the wilderness to die.

(ix) The Israelites further said they would have preferred serving the Egyptians in Egypt to dying in the wilderness.

(x) Moses encouraged them not to be afraid but to stand firm and see the salvation of the Lord.

(xi) they were seeing that day, would never be seen again.

(xi) According to Moses, the Lord would fight for them and that they should be still.

(xiii) God told Moses to inform the the Israelites not to cry but move forward.

(xiv) Moses was asked by the Lord. to lift up his rod and stretch his "hand over the sea (to divide it).

(x) The Lord hardened the hearts of the Egyptians so they would go into the sea to catch up with the Israelites.

(xvi) At this point, the angel of God who was in front of the Israelites went behind them in the form of a pillar of cloud.

(xvii) Moses then stretched out his hand over the sea as commanded and it parted creating a dry land,

(xviii) The Israelites then walked on the dry land across the sea to the other side.

(xix) The Egyptians chased them through the dry land but Moses stretched his hand, the sea merged killing Pharaoh and his people.

 
1(b). Nature of God:

(i) God is Omnipresent.

(i)God is Omnipotent

(iii)Nature responds to God

(iv) God is always faithful to his people

(v) God provides for his people.

(vi) It shows how gracious God is

(vi)God is Omniscience.

(viii) God protects his people. 

(ix) It shows the sovereignty of God. 



2(a).(1 Sam 2:11-36):

(i) Eli, the priest of God had 'two sons; Hophni and Phinehas.

(ii) These sons were also priests of God.

(iii) However, Eli's sons were worthless men who had no regards for the Lord.

(iv) The priest could only take sacrificial meat while it was being boiled.

(v) With a three-pronged fork, the servants of the priest would take for himself whatever the fork brought up.

(vi) However, the sons of Eli would reject this law and would rather demand raw meat.

(vii) Even when their attention was drawn to the law, they would forcefully take whatever portion of meat they wanted.

(viii) This sin of Eli's sons was very great in the sight of the lord for they treated the Lord's sacrifice with contempt.

(ix) Meanwhile, Samuel, a small boy living with Eli kept the law and was faithfully ministering before the Lord.

(x) Eli was well aware of the depraved life of his sons who even slept with the women serving at the entrance of the tent of meeting.

(xi) Eli drew the attention of his sons to the enormity of their sins and encouraged them to repent,

(xii) However, the sons' of Eli did not listen to their father' rebuke, for it was the Lord's will to put them to death.

(xiii) Now, a man of God came to Eli to remind him of the Lord's relationship with Israel and how He chose Eli's father as a priest to serve in His presence.

(xiv) He further expressed God's disappointment at how Eli honoured his sons over God's sacrifices.

(xv) He declared that even though, the Lord promised the house of Eli's father to be priests forever, He would honour only those who honour Him and despise those who despise Him.

(xvi) The Lord would cut short the strength of Eli's household and there would not be any old man in the family line (xvii) Furthermore, those who would be spared would only blind their eyes with tears and grieve their hearts, and all their descendants would die in the prime of their lives.

(xviii) Your two sons would die on the the same day and in their place, i would raise a faithful priest who would do what is on my heart

(xix) The new priest would be firmly established on Eli's household would bow down before him for sustenance.

 
2(b). 

(i) Assigning responsibilities to them.

(ii) Providing counseling and guidance.

(iii) Adequate supervision.

(iv) Showing interest in their affairs.

(v) Involving children decision-making.

(vi) Adequate provision of their needs.

(vi) Adequate formal education.

(viii) Being good role models to them.

(ix) Showing love and affection to them.

(x) Willingness to correct them when they go wrong.

(xi) Provision of religious and moral training.


3(a). (1 Sam 26 :1 - 25):

(i) To escape from Saul. David went to hide in the wilderness of Ziph.

(ii) The Ziphites informed Saul of the presence of David in the wilderness.

(iii) Saul went to the wilderness of Ziph with three thousand soldiers in search of David,

(iv) When David got to know about Saul's plans, he sent spies to confirm the presence of Saul in the wilderness.

(v) David and Abishai went in the night to where Saul was sleeping with Abner, his commander and his men of war.

(vi) Abishai sought permission from David to kill Saul.

(vii) David restrained him saying he will not spill the blood of the Lord's anointed.

(viii) David ordered Abishai to remove Saul's spear and jar of water.

(ix) Nobody saw them as all the people in the camp of Saul, were deeply asleep including Abner, his chief bodyguard.

(x) When David had gone far, he called out Abner and reprimanded him For his failure to keep proper watch over his master, Saul.

(xi) He said, Abner deserved to die for the security lapses.

(xii) David asked him about Saul's spear and jar of water.

(xiii) While David was reprimanding Abner, Saul recognized David's voice and he called out to him.

(xiv) David demanded to know why Saul wanted to kill him for no just cause.

(xv) Saul felt guilty and repented of his sins and promised, never to harm David.

(xvi) Saul appreciated the way David spared his life and David then returned the spear and jar of water he had collected

(xvii) Saul blessed David abundantly

 

3(b). Qualities of David;

(i) We must forgive those who offend us David had every opportunity to he Kill Saul, yet he spared him.

(ii) David demonstrated his submission to the will of God. He said he would not spill the blood of the Lord's anointed.

(iii) The need to fear God. It's reflected in David's decision not to slay the Lord's anointed.

(iv) We must show love to everyone around us.

(v) David showed good leadership by making sure that his making subordinate obeyed him. Eg. Abishai.

(vi) David trusted God to save/protect him from his enemies.

 

4(a). (a)(2 Kings 22, 23:1-30):

(i) Josiah was eight years old when he begin to reign.

(ii) He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his father.

(iii) During the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign, he asked that the temple should be renovated,

(iv) When the temple was being repaired, a copy of the book of the Law was discovered by Hilkiah, the High Priest.

(v) Hilkiah then gave the book to Shaphan, the king's secretary and he read it to the hearing of the king.

(vi) When the king heard the words of the book of the Law, he rent his clothes.

(vii) The king sent Hilkiah to go and find out from the Lord concerning the words of the book that was found,

(viii) Huldah, the prophetess was then consulted and she said that God would bring evil upon Judah. Because Judah had forsaken the Lord and had burned incense to other gods,

(x) She said King Josiah would be spared because his heart was penitent and the evil that will befall Judah would not happen in his days,

(xi) Josiah then summoned the elders to the temple and read the Law to them,

(xii) King Josiah then began is religious reforms by purging Judah of foreign and religious practices,

(xiii) All vessels and items made for Baal and Asheran were removed from the temple and burnt,

(xiv) All the priests who had been burning incense in the high places to Baal were killed,

(xv) All the houses built for the cult prostitutes were pulled down.

(xvi) The celebration of the Passover was reinstated

 
4(b).
(i) There are cultic practices and secret societies in the society and churches today as it was in the days of Josiah. (in Many worshippers in our churches today involve themselves in idol worship as in the days of Josjan).

(iii) Some pastors and church leaders indulge in immoral acts and unchristian practices as the priests of Josiah's time did.

(iv) There are corrupt practices, in the society and church as it happened in the days of Josiah.

(v) Commercialization of the gospel (e.g. ritual bathing, use of effigies, fake miracles, etc.).

(vi) Activities of fake pastors.

(vii) Syncretism.

(viii) Religious facade.


5(a). (Matt 26: 36-56, Mark14:32:52):

(i) Jesus and his disciples went to the garden of Gethsemane to pray

(ii) He took with him Peter, James and John to another place leaving the rest behind.

(iii) Jesus then left the three and went further to pray alone.

(iv) He prayed saying my father, if it be possible; let this cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt.

(v) Jesus came back to the three and found them sleeping and He asked Peter whether they could not watch with Him for one hour.

(vi) Jesus then told them to that they would not enter into temptation/the spirit was willing but the flesh is weak

(vii) Again, for the second time Jesus went away to play au if it was possible the-cup should pass by him.

(viii) Jesus came back and found the three disciples asleep again.

(ix)He left them and went to pray for the third time and He came back to meet them asleep.

(×) He asked them whether they were still sleeping and taking their rest.

(xi) Jesus then told them that the hour was at hand and the son of man would be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

(xii)He made them aware that the betrayer was at hand so they should get ready to go.

(xiii) As Jesus was speaking, Judas Iscariot led a crowd with swords and clubs.

(xiv) The crowd attempted arresting Jesus after Judas had kissed him.

(xv) One of Jesus' disciples drew out a sword and cut off the ears of a servant of the high priest.

(xvi) Jesus rebuked the disciple saying all who take the sword perish by the sword.

(xvii) He then fixed the ear of the servant back

(xviii)Jesus was then arrested and taken to Caiaphas.

(xix) All the disciples except Peter deserted him

 
5(b). 
(i) One has to visit the one going through the challenge.

(ii) One should pray with them.

(iii) One should assist the person in cash or kind when necessary.

(iv) Counseling the victim.

(v) Relocating/changing the victim's environment.

(vi) Seeking redress/justice for the victim.

(vii) Advocacy.


6(a). Jesus' Teaching on Forgiveness (Matt. 18: 21-35):

(i) Peter wanted to know from Jesus whether he should forgive his neighbour seven times.

(ii) Jesus responded by saying seventy times seven.

(iii) Jesus then told a parable comparing the kingdom of heaven to a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants.

(iv) And in the process, a servant who owed the King ten thousand talents was brought before him.

(v) Because he could not pay the money, the king ordered him to be sold with his family until the last money was paid.

(vi) The servant fell on his knees and begged the king to have patience with him and he would pay later,

(vi) Out of pity, the king released the servant and forgave him all the debt

(viii) As the servant went out, he met a fellow servant who owed him hundred denarii.

(ix) He instantly seized him by the throat demanding that he should pay what he owed him.

(x) His fellow servant begged him to have patience and that he would pay later.

(xi) But he refused and put him in prison till he paid the debt,

(xii) When his fellow servants saw what had taken place, they were disturbed and reported to the king.

(xiii) The king invited the first servant, whose debt he cancelled and reprimanded him.

(xiv) He said, Tie was a wicked servant and that he ought to have forgiven his fellow servant and had mercy on him as he did to him.

(xv) Out of anger, the king asked that he should be jailed until he paid the last money.

(xvi) Jesus ended by saying that anyone who did not forgive his fellow man from his heart would also not be forgiven by his heavenly Father.

 
6(b).
(i) Arrogance/pride.

(ii) Consistency of the offense.

(iii) The enormity/gravity of the offense.

(iv) Peer influence.

(v) Immaturity

(vi) Self-centeredness.

(vii) The emotional state of the offended/wickedness/hard heartedness.

(viii) Ignorance of the word of God.

(ix) Envy/hatred.


7(a). (Acts 2:1 -41):

(i) On the day of Pentecost, the apostles were together in the upper room,

(ii) Suddenly, a sound from heaven like that of a rushing mighty wind filled the place where they were gathered

(iii) There appeared on their heads, tongues as of fire which rested upon each of them.

(iv)They were all filled with the Holy Spirit and they started speaking in other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.

(v) There were many pilgrims from different nations of the world in Jerusalem that day.

(vi)They converged together to listen to the apostles but they were amazed as each heard the apostles speak in his own language,

(vi) While many of the pilgrims wondered on the incident, some mocked them saying, they were already drunk.

(viii) Peter stood up to refute the allegation of drunkenness.

(ix) He said they were not drunk as the people had thought,

(x) But they were speaking in tongues in line with the outpouring of the Holy Spirit as prophesied by Joel.

(xi) That on the last days." He would pour out His Spirit upon all flesh people would prophesy and there would be signs and wonders.

(xii) Peter further recounted the signs and wonders God had accomplished through Jesus Christ and his crucifixion and resurrection.

(xiii) To support the resurrection of Jesus, Peter quoted the Psalm of David which says "for thou wilt not abandon my soul to Hades nor let thy Holy one see corruption".

(xiv) Peter said the people were Witnesses to the resurrection of Jesus Christ,

(xv) Peter said David was speaking about the resurrection of Christ that he would not be abandoned to Hades that his flesh would not see corruption.

(xvi) As 'Peter concluded his speech, the Jerusalem pilgrims listening to him were touched and they inquired from him what they should do.

(xvii) Peter advised them to repent from their sins and be baptized for the forgiveness of their sins.

(xviii) Three thousand people repented; they were all baptized. (xix) They joined the apostles and received the Holy Spirit

 
7(b).
(i) The receipt of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost gave the apostles the courage and boldness to preach the gospel.

(ii) Most of the Jerusalem pilgrims repented and were baptized

(iii) Speaking in tongues symbolizes the universalism of the gospel.

(iv) The incident at Pentecost marked the beginning of the church.

(v) The lives of the apostles changed; the Holy Spirit turned them into dynamic apostles.

(vi)The apostles were filled with the resurrection power of Jesus Christ.

(vi) The apostles stood up against anyone that opposed the preaching of the gospel.

(viii) The outpouring of the Holy Spirit was a fulfillment of Jesus' promise to the apostles.

(ix) The apostles were empowered to perform signs and wonders and to prophesy.


8(a). (James 2:1-13):

(i) James admonished Christians not to show' partiality to anyone but to treat people equally as God expects.

(ii). James holds the view that all Christians are ambassadors of Christ who have the faith of Christ.

(iii) James gave an illustration of a rich man who comes into a Christian gathering, with golden ring and fine clothes and is given special attention

(iv) At the same time, a poor man shabbily dressed also comes in and is treated with contempt.

(v) James is of the view that both the rich man and the poor man should be treated equally without discrimination.

(vi) He says if preferential treating is given to the rich man over the poor man then one is guilty of partiality. According to James,

(vii) showing partiality amounts to causing disunity and assuming the role of judges with evil intention.

(viii) Hence, to James, no distinction should be made among the people because God Himself does not discriminate. (ix) James said God has chosen the poor in the land to be rich in faith.

(×) He stressed that the poor are the heirs of the kingdom which is promised to those who love God.

(xi) He further stated that it is the rich who oppress the poor and drag them to court

(xii) Furthermore, James says that the rich blaspheme the honourable name of God.

(xiii) He therefore concluded that discrimination against the poor and favouring the rich was wrong and unacceptable.

(xiv) James hold the view that anyone who keeps the whole law but fails in one has become guilty of all.

(xv) This is due to the fact that the same God, who said we should not commit adultery, said we should not kill.

(xvi) He finally urged Christians to speak and act as those who are to be judged under the law of liberty.

(xvii) For judgment is without mercy to those who show no mercy.

(xviii) However, mercy triumphs over judgment.

 
8(b). 
(i) It creates division in the church/Disunity.

(ii) It could lead to break away of members/ Loss of faith in God.

(ill) It inhibits spiritual growth among Christians.

(iv) It discourages unbelievers from joining the church.

(v) It brings about unhealthy rivalry and discord in the church.

(vi)It leads to segregation in the church.

(vi) It stifles development of talents.

(viii) It leads to favouritism/nepotism.

(ix) It breeds undemocratic tendencies in the church.

(x) It breeds inferiority complex /Lack of confidence/Absence of belongingness.


9 (a). (1 Peter 2:1-25):

(i) Peter admonished Christians living among non-Christians to put away all malice, guile, insincerity, envy and all slander.

(ii) He said, they should behave like the new born babies and long for the to pure spiritual milk so as to grow up to salvation.

(iii) Peter referred to believers as a chosen race, a royal priesthood and a holy nation.

(iv) Peter again said, Christians were God's own people and as such they should declare the wonderful deeds of Him who has called them from darkness into light.

(v) He remarked that some time past Christians were no people but now they are God's people and have received mercy

(vi) Peter appealed to Christians not to conform to the standards of this world.

(vi) They should also avoid the passion of the flesh and things that hinder their spiritual growth

(vii) Christians must also maintain good conduct among non-Christians so that in case of false accusation people would see their good deeds and glorify God.

(ix) Again, Peter advises Christians to be subject to every human institution and authority set up by God,

(x) And by so doing, they would put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

(xi) Peter advised Christians that as men who live under the freedom of Christ, they must not use their freedom as pretext for evil.

(xii) Again, as servants of God, Christians should honour all men and love the brotherhood.

(xiii) They should also fear God and honour their leaders/emperors/elders.

(xiv) Peter also urged servants to be submissive to their masters both the kind and the overbearing.

(xv) He made Christians aware that they could suffer for doing the right thing but they must not be worried,

(xvi) Finally, he said Christians should follow the good example of Jesus who trusted God even in his suffering.

 
9(b). 
(i) Practicing good work ethics.

(ii) Avoiding social vices/Disgraceful conducts.

(iii) Being law/-abiding.

(iv) Performing their civic responsibilities,

(v) Reporting criminal activities to law enforcement agencies.

(vi) Being tolerant of others.

(vii) Being the conscience/Mouthpiece of society.

(viii) Practicing the teachings of the Christian faith/Being Godfearing.

(ix) Avoiding corrupt practices.

(x) Engaging in charity works.